Richard Stephen Sambora (born July 11, 1959) is an American musician, singer, and songwriter, best known as the lead guitarist of the rock band Bon Jovi from 1983 to 2013. He and lead singer Jon Bon Jovi formed the main songwriting unit for the band. He has also released three solo albums: Stranger in This Town in 1991, Undiscovered Soul in 1998, and Aftermath of the Lowdown released in September 2012.[1]

In 2018, Sambora was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Bon Jovi,[2] and reunited with his former bandmates for a performance at the induction ceremony.[3] That year, he formed the duo RSO alongside Orianthi. After two EPs, the pair released their debut album Radio Free America in May.[4].

Richard Stephen Sambora was born on July 11, 1959, in Perth Amboy, New Jersey, the son of Joan (née Sienila), a secretary, and Adam C. Sambora, a factory foreman.[5] Sambora is of Polish descent[6] and was raised Catholic.[7] He grew up in Woodbridge Township, New Jersey,[8] and graduated from Woodbridge High School in 1977.[9] He played basketball in high school; his sophomore team won the 1975 Group 4 State title.[10]

Sambora's first instrument was the accordion, which he began to play at the age of 6.[11] He began playing the guitar at the age of 12, following the death of Jimi Hendrix in 1970. From his early days, Sambora was strongly influenced by blues and 1960s rock and roll. His most important influences were Eric Clapton, Jimi Hendrix, Jeff Beck, Stevie Ray Vaughan, Johnny Winter, Jimmy Page, Joe Perry, Brian May, George Harrison, Hank Marvin, Dave Davies, Pete Townshend, Ritchie Blackmore, Tony Iommi, Manny Charlton, Bernie Leadon, Don Felder, Joe Walsh, and B. B. King.[12] and he has also cited psychedelic soul singer Janis Joplin as having a big influence on his musical style. Sambora was also influenced by Spanish classical music and began a lifelong love of the Spanish guitar. Classical music directly inspired several of his songs, such as The Answer which was originally written on piano.[13]

Sambora also plays many other instruments, such as drums, bass, saxophone, and piano. The first time he performed on stage wa.

Sambora was a guitarist for the band Message, and with that band put out a 1982 independent record titled Lessons. It was re-released in 1995 under the name Message, and in 2000 as Lessons. He was later in a band, Mercy, which was signed to Led Zeppelin-owned record label Swan Song Records, and then Duke Williams & the Extremes, who were signed to Capricorn Records. Sambora was also in an improvisational club band called Richie Sambora & Friends. He was part-owner of a club in New Jersey, and at age 19 owned his own independent label Dream Disc Records. Sambora's first professional tour was as an opening act for Joe Cocker in the early 1980s. Shortly before joining Bon Jovi in 1983, Sambora unsuccessfully[14] auditioned for Kiss, to be Ace Frehley's replacement.

Sambora joined Bon Jovi in 1983,[15][16] replacing the band's original lead guitarist Dave Sabo, who went on to form Skid Row.[17] Alec John Such had been playing in a band with Sambora and joined Bon Jovi while Sambora was away in Los Angeles auditioning for Kiss. When Sambora returned home, Such promptly invited him to see the band play. Sambora was impressed with Bon Jovi after seeing the band perform live, describing the band as "magic", and he subsequently approached Jon Bon Jovi backstage and "gave him a verbal résumé". Though Sambora initially believed Bon Jovi was not interested in him, he received a phone call several days later inviting him to rehearse with the band. When Jon arrived and heard the band with Sambora, he hired him on the spot. That night, the pair returned to Bon Jovi's mother's house and wrote the songs "Come Back" and "Burning for Love", both of which would appear on the band's 1983 debut album.[18]

In the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards, Richie Sambora and Jon Bon Jovi performed acoustic versions of "Livin' on a Prayer" and "Wanted Dead or Alive". While MTV Unplugged was already in development by the time of this event, its showrunners have credited the pair's performance with influencing the show to go from initially being meant only for "young, up-and-coming artists" into being a simplified showcase for the "big, stadium, electric-arena-type acts".[19]

The song "Next 100 years" from the album Crush, written by Sambora and Bon Jovi, is a self cover. The Japanese version, with lyrics by B'z's Koshi Inaba, was recorded first in 1999 by Johnny & Associates's special unit called J-Friends as part of the relief efforts for the 1995 Great Hanshin earthquake. The live version of the song was also included in a DVD released in April 2003, "J-FRIENDS Never Ending Spirit 1997-2003". It included performances from several of the agency's groups, as well as by the special unit.[20][21][22][23][24][25][26]

Sambora left the band in 2013[15][16] prior to a concert in Calgary during the band's Because We Can tour. Since his departure, Sambora has only played with Bon Jovi at their Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Induction in 2018. In 2016, Sambora stated that his reason for leaving the band was in order to give his family more of his attention. "I really needed to take some time to be with my daughter," he stated "She needed me and I needed her, actually."[27]

Sambora also released a solo EP with Orianthi, and performed alongside the RSO band member and his girlfriend on April 7, 2018.[28][29]

Sambora's first solo album was 1991's Stranger in This Town, a blues-influenced album that charted at No. 36 on the Billboard 200 and No. 20 on the UK Albums Chart. The lead single, "Ballad Of Youth", reached a high of No. 63 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and No. 59 in the UK. "One Light Burning" was released as the second single and the album titled track, "Stranger In This Town" as the third which charted at No. 38 on the Mainstream rock charts. Eric Clapton played the lead guitar on the promo single Mr Bluesman, backed by Sambora on acoustic guitars. Sambora did a short US tour in support of the album, featuring Tony Levin (bass), Dave Amato (guitar), Crystal Taliefero (percussion) and Bon Jovi bandmates Tico Torres (drums) and David Bryan (keyboards). The track "Rosie" was co-written by Jon Bon Jovi and was initially intended for the fourth Bon Jovi album New Jersey. It was also released as a promo single in Japan. "Ballad of Youth" was released in the UK in summer 1991 and despite plugs from The Friday Rock Show on BBC Radio 1 the song barely skimmed the top 75.

Undiscovered Soul was Sambora's second solo album, released in 1998. The album was produced by Don Was. The album charted at No. 174 on The Billboard 200 and No. 24 on the UK Albums Chart. The lead single "Hard Times Come Easy" charted at No. 39 on the Mainstream rock chart and No. 37 in the UK, the second single "In It For Love" charted at No. 58 on the UK Singles Chart. The title track "Undiscovered Soul" and "Made in America" were also released as singles. In support of Undiscovered Soul, Sambora toured Japan, Australia and Europe in the summer of 1998. The band featured Richie Supa (guitar), Ron Wikso (drums), Kasim Sulton (bass), Tommy Mandel (keyboards), Everett Bradley (percussion; Japan only), Gioia Bruno (percussion; Australia only) and Crystal Taliefero (percussion; Europe only).

In 2001, Sambora had a single for a movie soundtrack On The Line which was titled "Take Me On".
